# Type_localities_Bolivian_fishes
This is a list of type localities of all nominal taxa of fishes within the borders of Bolivia. Geographic coordinates are sourced from the literature or, if not available, georeferenced using a standardized procedure.

Many type specimens of Bolivian fish species have been deposited in foreign museum collections, are in bad state, or both. Topotypes would greatly facilitate taxonomic research of Bolivian fishes. A list of type localities is a critical first step to enable the collection of such topotypes.

# Methodology
I consider all nominal species (i.e. including synonymized names). For georeferencing, I follow Chapman AD & Wieczorek JR (2020). I include type localities with uncertain reference to Bolivia (e.g. 18th century descriptions of _Orestias_ species with 'Lake Titicaca' as type locality).

# Results
Type locality of _Apistogramma inconspicua_ Kullander 1983: The description of the type locality in the original description reads as follows: "Bolivia, depto. Santa Cruz, R. Paraguay system, small pool of the R. Candelaria, above bridge on road Carmen-Santa Rosa (16°00'S 61°40'W). 29 October 1977. Leg. J.-P. Gosse (sta. 24)". The coordinates are imprecise and point to a location about 26 km west-southwest of Santa Rosa and 56 km west-northwest of the assumed actual type locality. There is only one river that has a considerable discharge between the two villages of Carmen de Ruiz and Santa Rosa de la Roca, which is the río Paraguá (sometimes spelled río Paraguay). It crosses the road at a hamlet called San Antonio de Candelaria. Additional information on the locality can be found in Walschaerts (1987), who describes it as "Bolivie, département de Santa Cruz, petit pool du Rio Candelaria, 16°00'S-61°40'W, 29-X-1977, station 24". The same station number 24 of the expedition by J.-P. Gosse is also described as "Bolivie, département de Santa Cruz, petit pool du Rio Candelaria en aval du pont, route Carmen - Santa Rosa à Carmen, bassin du Rio Guaporé, 29-X-1977, station 24" as a sampling location of paratypes of _Cichlasoma boliviense_ (Walschaerts 1987). The last bit is interesting here: _á_ Carmen could be translated as _in_ or _near_ Carmen. The río Paraguá is indeed the first river that crosses the road from Carmen to Santa Rosa and it is only 4.3 km from Carmen (of a total of 43 km between the two villages). There is a small incongruence between the locality descriptions by Kullander and Walschaerts. While Kullander (1982) writes _above bridge_, Walschaerts (1987) states that the pool is _en aval du pont_ (downstream of the bridge). It is unclear whether this is a translation error or whether fish were collected in pools both above and below the bridge. There are additional notes in the article: "The type-locality is a very small river tributary to the Rio San Joaquín in the Rio Guaporé drainage system. It is not the better known Rio Candelaria close to the Brazilian border east of the Serrania de San Lorenzo, where there are also two villages called Carmen and Santa Rosa (common village names in Bolivia)". This statement seems incorrect. The río San Joaquín (also called río Negro) is indeed a tributory of rio Guaporé (via the río San Martín and río Blanco), but its tributaries do not cross the road between Carmen de Ruiz and Santa Rosa de la Roca. In summary, it seems likely that a small pool of the río Paraguá below the bridge at San Antonio de Candelaria is the actual type locality of _Apistogramma inconspicua_.

Kullander describes the type locality of _Cichlasoma boliviense_ as follows: "Bolivia, depto Santa Cruz, R. Guaporé system, R. Uruguaito, tributary of the R. Quizer, 13 km S San Xavier". This is slightly at odds with the writing of Walschaerts (1987), who spells the name of the river differently: "Bolivie, département de Santa Cruz, Rio Urugaita, bassin du Guaporé, affluent de la rivière Quizer". It is unclear to which river both authors refer to. There is indeed a río Uruguayito (again slightly different spelling) close to San Javier, but it crosses the road between Concepción and Santa Rosa de la Roca. It is also not a tributary of the río Quizer, but a tributary of the río Negro (also called río San Joaquín by some sources). The río Quizer itself crosses the road between San Javier and San Ramón about 11.5 km south of San Javier, before crossing the same road again at kilometer 27. The first crossing seems to be the most likely candidate for the type locality.

The type locality of _Apistogramma luelingi_ Kullander 1976 is located in a "Kleine Quebrada unterhalb Todos Santos (Bolivien)". Todos Santos is a hamlet about 4 km (as the crow flies) from Puerto Aurora at the río Chaparé. It is depicted in an maps in Kullander (1976) and Meinken (1969). It is unclear which quebrada is meant and whether 'unterhalb' (below) means 'to the south' or 'downstream' (río Chapare flows to the north). The hand-drawn map by the collector K.H. Lüling printed in the Kullander (1976) suggests it is to the south, but the more detailed map in Meinken (1969, also drawn by Lüling) indicates locations to the north (downstream) as 'unterhalb Todos Santos'.

The type locality description for _Apistogramma rubrolineata_ has an unconventional format of the coordinates. It literaly reads 11°20'083'' S, 67°44'576'' W, but the seconds should not exceed 59. It was likely a decimal error. 11°20'8.3''S and 67°44'57.6'' W points to a location in the forest a few meters from the vegetated river bank about 1.3 km upstream of Puerto Cardenas. 11°20.083''S and 67°44.576'' W points to a location that can easily reached by foot from Puerto Cardenas. "Der Typusfundort lag an einem lehmigen Steilufer mit ins Wasser wachsenden Büschen" matches this location.

_Crenicichla saxatilis_ var. _semicincta_ Steindachner 1892 was described based on specimens collected in "Bolivia, Provinz Yuracares, im oberen Chaparé bei Puerto de San Mateo" (Steindachner 1892). There is no geographic location that can be unabiguously identified as Puerto de San Mateo. San Mateo has been previously been identified as "Rio San Mateo where Todos Santos is situated" (Conover 1943), "the region is in the tropical forested Andean foothills at 500-1000 m a.s.l." and "Puerto de San Mateo was near an old road, which in the late 1800s was one of the few passageways between the Bolivian highlands and the lowlands" (Duellmann & Köhler 2005), but these georeferencing attempts were unprecise. Yuracares is nowadays called Chapare and belongs to the department of Cochabamba. Puerto refers to a place where goods could be loaded on ships, meaning that the river should be navigable. The name "San Mateo", "Puerto San Mateo" or "Puerto de San Mateo" appear in the taxonomic literature as sampling localities for birds (e.g. Berlepsch 1901), arthropods (e.g. Simon 1892, Staudinger 1892, Hering 1925, Lourenço & Leguin 2011, Marsola & Brescovit 2018), reptiles (e.g. Avila-Pires 1995) and amphibians (e.g. Steindachner 1892). The collector of the holotype of _Saxatilia semicincta_ could not be identified directly based on a literature search, but it was very likely Gustav Garlepp. Birds have reportedly been collected by Garlepp in San Mateo in July and August 1891 (Berlepsch 1901). A specimen of Kentropyx altamazonica Cope 1876 has been obtained by the Natural History Museum of Vienna from Otto Straudinger (Avila-Pires 1995), who is known to have received collections from Garlepp (Anonymous 'S.' 1900). Some arthropods from San Mateo have also been reported to have been collected by Garlepp (Simon 1892, Staudinger 1892, Lourenço & Leguin 2011). Berlepsch (1901), who corresponded with Garlepp, describes the location of San Mateo as "im heissen Flachlande am Ausläufer der Yungas von Cochabamba", "am Fusse der Anden", "im heissen Tiefland der Yungas-Region". Staudinger, who also corresponded with Garlepp also provides more details: "San Mateo am Rio Juntas (Chaparé) in Bolivien (etwa 300 Meter hoch)" (Staudinger 1892). In conclusion, Puerto San Mateo is most likely located in the Chaparé province in the río Chaparé drainage at the foothills of the Andes at about 300 m a.s.l.. As such, it would lie in the vicinity of Villa Tunari. Villa Tunari is situated at the confluence of the río San Mateo and río Espiritu Santo, where they form the río Chaparé. There is a little hamlet just south of Villa Tunari that is called San Mateo, but there is no direct evidence that this hamlet is Garlepp's San Mateo. Historical attempts to find the location of San Mateo incorrectly located it as "a few miles east of Totora" (Bond & Meyer de Schauensee 1942) near Kara Huasi about halfway between Santa Cruz (Niethammer 1953) and subsequently georeferenced it as 17.70°S, 64.70°W (Mlíkovský 2009) and 17°42’/64°47’ (Dirksen & De la Riva 1999). There is indeed a hamlet with the name San Mateo in that area and a river with the same name. But it is far from the Chaparé province, not at the foothills of the Andes, and the river is not a tributary of the río Chaparé. Instead, it flows río Sajta which itself merges with the río Ichilo at Puerto Villarroel. The georeferencing attempt by Marsola & Brescovit (2018; 16°19'40"S; 59°36'52"W) points to a different San Mateo in the Velasco province in the department of Santa Cruz.

# References
Avila-Pires TCS (1995) Lizards of Brazilian Amazonia (Reptilia: Squamata). Zoologische Verhandelingen Leiden 299:1-706.

Berlesch 1901............

Bond J & Meyer de Schauensee R (1942) The Birds of Bolivia. Part I. Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 94:307-391.

Chapman AD & Wieczorek JR (2020) Georeferencing Best Practices. Copenhagen: GBIF Secretariat. https://doi.org/10.15468/doc-gg7h-s853

Conover 1943.................

Dirksen L & De la Riva (1999) The lizards and amphisbaenians of Bolivia (Reptilia, Squamata): Checklist, localties, and bibliography. Graellsia 55:199-215.

Duellman WE & Köhler J (2005) New specie of marupial frog (Hylidae: Hemiphractinae: Gastrotheca) from the Yungas of Bolivia. Journal of Herpetology 39(1):91-100.

Kullander SO (1976) Apistogramma luelingi sp. nov., a new cichlid fish from Bolivia (Teleostei: Cichlidae). Bonner Zoologische Beiträge 27(3-4):258-266.

Kullander SO (1982) Cichlid Fishes from the La Plata Basin. Part IV. Review of the Apistogramma Species, with Description of a New Species (Teleostei, Cichlidae). Zoologica Scripta 11(4):307-313.

Kullander SO (1983) A revision of the South American cichlid genus Cichlasoma (Teleostei: Cichlidae). Naturhistoriska Riksmuseet, Stockholm. I-IV + 1-296, Pls. 1-14.

Marsola A & Brescovit AD (2018) The taxonomy of the American Ariadna Audouin (Araneae: Synspermiata: Segestriidae). Zootaxa 4400(1):1-114

Meinken H (1969) Wissenschaftliche Ergebnisse der Peru-Bolivien-Expedition Dr. K. H. Lüling 1966. Rivulichthys luelingi nov. spec., eine Zahnkarpfen-Neuheit aus Ostbolivien (Pisces, Teleostei, Rivulinae). Bonner Zoologische Beiträge 20 (4):423-428. 

Mlíkovský J (2009) Types of birds in the collections of the Museum and Institute of Zoology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warszawa, Poland. Part 3: South American birds. Journal of the National Museum (Prague), Natural History Series 178(5):17-180.

Niethammer G (1953) Zur Vogelwelt Boliviens. Bonner Zoologische Beiträge 3-4:195-303.

Staudinger O (1892) Neue Papilio-Formen aus Südamerika..........

Steindachner F (1892) Über einige neue und seltene Fischarten aus der ichthyologischen Sammlung des K. K. Naturhistorischen Hofmuseums. Denkschriften der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Mathematisch-Naturwissenschaftliche Classe. v. 59 (1. Abth.): 357-384, Pls. 1-6.

Steindachner F (1892) Über zwei noch unbeschrieben Nototrema-Arten aus Ecuador und Bolivia..........

Walschaerts L (1987) Catalogue des types de poissons recents de l'Institute Royal des Sciences Naturelles Belgique. Documents de Travail N°40. pp. 1-66.
